project-planning/process-tasks.md, before:

---
trigger: manual
---

# Processing a list of tasks

Guidelines for managing task lists in markdown files to track progress on completing a PRD

## Task Implementation

- **One sub-task at a time:** Do **NOT** start the next sub‑task until you ask the user for permission and they say “yes” or "y"
- **Completion protocol:**
  1. When you finish a **sub‑task**, immediately mark it as completed by changing `[ ]` to `[x]`.
  2. If **all** subtasks underneath a parent task are now `[x]`, also mark the **parent task** as completed.
- Stop after each sub‑task and wait for the user’s go‑ahead.

## Task List Maintenance

1. **Update the task list as you work:**

   - Mark tasks and subtasks as completed (`[x]`) per the protocol above.
   - Add new tasks as they emerge.

2. **Maintain the “Relevant Files” section:**
   - List every file created or modified.
   - Give each file a one‑line description of its purpose.

## AI Instructions

When working with task lists, the AI must:

1. Regularly update the task list file after finishing any significant work.
2. Follow the completion protocol:
   - Mark each finished **sub‑task** `[x]`.
   - Mark the **parent task** `[x]` once **all** its subtasks are `[x]`.
3. Add newly discovered tasks.
4. Keep “Relevant Files” accurate and up to date.
5. Before starting work, check which sub‑task is next.
6. After implementing a sub‑task, update the file and then pause for user approval.

Commit message:

Enhance availability management and bug tracking documentation
- Updated the settings.local.json to include "mcp__ide__getDiagnostics" in the allowed commands.
- Refined the enabledMcpjsonServers configuration for clarity.
- Added a new backlog.md file to outline tasks for improving provider onboarding and user experience.
- Introduced bug-spec-generate.md and bug-task-generate.md files to guide the creation of bug fix and improvement task lists.
- Created prd-spec-generate.md and prd-tasks-generate.md files to facilitate the generation of Product Requirements Documents and associated tasks.
- Deleted the outdated general-tasks.md file to streamline task management.
- Added detailed task lists for calendar bugs and overall codebase improvements to enhance tracking and resolution of issues.

These changes aim to improve the organization of project documentation and enhance the process for managing bugs and feature requests.

project-planning/process-tasks.md, after:

---
trigger: manual
---

# Processing a list of tasks

Guidelines for managing task lists in markdown files to track progress on completing a PRD or Task Spec

## Execution Modes

### Default Mode (Interactive)
- **One sub-task at a time:** Do **NOT** start the next sub‑task until you ask the user for permission and they say "yes" or "y"
- Stop after each sub‑task and wait for the user's go‑ahead.

### YOLO Mode (Continuous)
- Execute all tasks continuously without stopping for confirmation
- Use this mode when user explicitly requests: "execute tasks using @project-planning/process-tasks.md yolo mode"
- Mark off tasks as completed but proceed immediately to next task without waiting

## Task Implementation

- **Completion protocol:**
  1. When you finish a **sub‑task**, immediately mark it as completed by changing `[ ]` to `[x]`.
  2. If **all** subtasks underneath a parent task are now `[x]`, also mark the **parent task** as completed.

## Task List Maintenance

1. **Update the task list as you work:**

   - Mark tasks and subtasks as completed (`[x]`) per the protocol above.
   - Add new tasks as they emerge.

2. **Maintain the “Relevant Files” section:**
   - List every file created or modified.
   - Give each file a one‑line description of its purpose.

## AI Instructions

When working with task lists, the AI must:

1. Regularly update the task list file after finishing any significant work.
2. Follow the completion protocol:
   - Mark each finished **sub‑task** `[x]`.
   - Mark the **parent task** `[x]` once **all** its subtasks are `[x]`.
3. Add newly discovered tasks.
4. Keep "Relevant Files" accurate and up to date.
5. Before starting work, check which sub‑task is next.
6. **Default Mode:** After implementing a sub‑task, update the file and then pause for user approval.
7. **YOLO Mode:** After implementing a sub‑task, update the file and immediately proceed to the next task without waiting for approval.
